Episode 3: Post-Study Cravings


Asher:

Back, episode three, "Post-Study Munch Madness."

I just wanted to let everyone know I ended up finding my coffee from earlier to that.

Ava:

Uh, well you definitely don't need any of that anymore.

Asher:

It's 11:30 PM, and we just left the library at Emory.

My backpack feels like a brick.

My brain is fried, and all I want is food.

Like, a lot of food.

And when I say a lot, we mean two slices of pizza, a protein bar, a cookie, and if you're lucky, stealing your roommate's leftovers.

Ava:

Oh my gosh, is Chipotle open?

Can we go?

Asher:

So why do we go full monster mode after studying?

Turns out, it's not just lack of self-control.

Again, it's neuroscience.

When you've been focused for hours and your brain burns through energy, it signals a need to refuel.

That's where ghrelin comes from.

It's a hormone released by the stomach that tells your brain, "I'm hungry."

It goes to a region of the brain called the arcuate nucleus in the hypothalamus, specifically to neurons called AGRP neurons, which promote food-seeking behavior.

That's the appetite phase.

Ava:

Sorry guys, I had to let that all chuckle.

Sorry for interrupting your passion.

Ava:

When you find that food and start eating, another area, the lateral hypothalamus, kicks in, and that's the consummatory phase.

It reinforces the behavior with feelings of pleasure.

Think of it as that "yum" signal.

You're also releasing dopamine during this phase, especially if the food is tasty or high-calorie, for me, specifically high-calorie.

Your brain's reward system, including the nucleus accumbens, is basically going, "Good job, fatty!

Keep going!"

Asher:

Sorry guys, we're just really hungry and losing our minds after our massive study session.

Ava:

And then there's supposed to be a cessation phase.

When the hormones that are signaling, like leptin or signals from the nucleus of the solitary tract, say, "Stop, you're full."

But after hours of stress and studying, sometimes those signals get jumbled up and muted.

Also, stress shifts your priorities.

I swear, just like hungry mice will ignore fear or social interaction to eat.

Your brain is saying, "Food is now top priority." Because I'm relating us to mice because sometimes I feel like a mice don't like discouraging, doing my leftovers.

Asher:

Sorry.

Ava:

Yeah, so those late-night feasts?

You're not broken.

You're just running a homeostatic recovery mission.

Brain spanned.